What follows is a messy list of possible research topics for this course. You are not obliged to use one of them; they are just a springboard for your thinking. You are warmly encouraged to jot your own ideas down in this space, for your own benefit or for the benefit of others.

1. Poetry and sound: thinking about the relationships between speech and writing that we've explored in theory and in practice, look at post-1960s work in "oral poetry" by writers just as Jerome Rothenberg, Native American poets such as Simon Ortiz, and/or the work of Charles Bernstein and/or the PennSound archive of oral performances of poetry. The amazing online archive [PennSound](https://writing.upenn.edu/pennsound/) is a great starting place.
1.Librivox: especially on the heels of our experiment, think about the phenomenon of the production of audiobook versions of public domain novels in spatially distributed networks of volunteers. You might look at the edited volume by Matthew Rubery, which contains an essay on the topic, in addition to the piece that we read together by Weber.
1.Oral performance of novels: again, working from Rubery's work, look at authors like Charles Dickens or Mark Twain, who performed their novels and other fictions before large, live audiences. There is a particularly extensive literature on Dickens in this area.
1.Annotation as formal principle: look at twentieth-century authors, especially those associated with postmodernism, who incorporate "annotations" into the text proper. Examples include Nabokov's *Pale Fire* and David Foster-Wallace's *Infinite Jest*, both of which incorporate footnotes and other "marginal" writing spaces to break up the linearity of the traditional novel. Mark Danielevski's *House of Leaves* is a more extravagant experiment in print-based derangements of linear prose narrative.
1.Note taking and its "material supports": extending Blair's analysis, might look at a historical instance of note taking, with a special emphasis on the materiality of taking notes and the collective labor involved. Examples might include the use of the humble index card from the e20thC to the present (you could even write about the Future Initiative's love for the note card!), the rise of networked/digital note taking systems from the 90s to the present, or inscriptive systems from antiquity to the early modern, like the wax tablet or other erasable/scriptible media (Chartier and Stallybrass are good here). Alternatively, you might look at what is something of a blind spot in Blair's analysis and look at collective memory storage/sorting practices in oral, kinship-based societies, perhaps with a special emphasis on poetry (happy to help kick ideas around).
1.Histories of marginalia: one might look at the academic literature around exchanges of marginalized texts in the Romantic era (Coleridge, for one, was a famous annotator), discussions in histories of the library about proper/improper ways of handling books (which always have strong racial/gender/class components), and so on. Lerer's article is richly cited and may generate additional ideas for places to go to hone in on a particular moment. [Melville's Marginalia[(https://melvillesmarginalia.org/) might be interesting to look at here.
1.Following the example of Jenna, one might look into Twitter as an annotation platform: are there examples of media "texts," from awards shows to presidential debates to conspicuous pop cultural objects (e.g., Beyonce's "Lemonade"), that elicted torrents of commentary on Twitter that one might isolate via hashtags and analyze as a sort of "marginalia" in the age of Web 2.0?
1.Literature and games: look at an instance of literature positioning itself as a game, or of games that resemble novels in their ambitious modes of storytelling. The theoretical work of writers like Bogost, Wardrip-Fruin, Murray, and McGonigal might help here. You might start more inductively, from texts (avant-garde groups like Dada or OULIPO loved games; might look at the text game Adventure or its more sophisticated Infocom followers in the 1970s-80s) that marry complex narrative and user-driven game mechanics. You could also look at the schedule of readings from [my graduate course on literature and play](https://dh780fa23.commons.gc.cuny.edu) for ideas.
1.You might use ~[Twine](http://twinery.org/)~ or something similar to tell (or retell) a story as a game. I don't expect you to write a novel, obviously, but it would be interesting to create a piece of what could be developed into something longer/more robust.
1.Genius.com and annotation: One associates literary criticism, and especially the close reading of poems, as something one does "for school," period. But genius.com, formerly rapgenius.com, is one of the most heavily trafficked sites on the web and is basically just one big exercise in literary "close reading." An interesting essay (or digital project) could emerge from looking at the "protocols" that structure these acts of close reading. What does it mean that "authorized" accounts by artists get special treatment? What kinds of comments get the most attention? How does it change the "text" to read it, not via headphones over beats, but on the screen, next to others' comments? How do you interpret the site's decision to close a given text to annotation once it's been "fully annotated"?
1.Any of the group projects could be expanded or reinterpreted as a final project, so if one of these approaches whetted your appetite (or the appetite of you and a peer or two), get in touch.
